now let's return to the Middle East
because for weeks Aid agencies have been
warning of the huge scale of Destruction
in Gaza no journalists though have been
allowed in to independently check those
claims now BBC verify working with
academics whove used satellite radar
mapping analysis can show the extent of
Israel's military strikes they found
that more than half of gaza's buildings
have now been destroyed or damaged
during the war with Israel BBC verifies
Merlin Thomas has the latest
more than half of gaza's buildings have
been damaged or destroyed since Israel
launched its retaliation for the Hamas
attacks of 7th of October that's
according to new data now take a look at
this map of the Gaza Strip this is from
the 12th of October just a few days
after the War Began and the red bits you
can see show the damage of destroyed
buildings in the area but look at this
this is on the 29th of November you can
see just how much of the north was
destroyed that's why the original
Israeli offensive was focused since then
that offensive was expanded to the whole
Strip This is the most recent map we
have from the 29th of January you can
see the extent of the damage
particularly in the South and Israel had
repeatedly told gazans to move South for
their safety this is the city of carun
and it's been severely affected and if
we look at satellite images that gives
us an idea of the scale of Destruction
on the ground particularly because no
International journalists have been
allowed in by
Israel this is from the 2nd of December
near two months into the war and you can
see just how much of the neighborhood of
carun looks undamaged this Tower here Al
it was the tallest building in the
neighborhood now just 6 weeks later take
a look at what happens much of the
neighborhood has been flattened by
Israeli attacks and the damage is even
more striking from ground level what
were once bustling cities full of life
now derelict and destroyed the Israel
Defense Forces have said these attacks
areen necessary because Hamas
deliberately embeds itself in civilian
areas but questions have been asked
about destruction of buildings seemingly
firmly in the control of the IDF take a
look at this this is a video it's isra
University in Northern Gaza and it was
already badly damaged before it was
blown up completely and what looks like
a massive controlled explosion the IDF
says the approval process for the blast
is now being
investigated and large areas of farm
land across Gaza have also been
extensively damaged that's important
because although Palestinians were
heavily dependent on Imports before the
start of the war a lot of their food
came from farming and food production
from inside the strip but areas that
were once used to produce food have now
been churned up and bulldozed marked out
for Israeli armored
vehicles now Aid agencies say half of
gasa's population faces starvation the
IDF told us they found
Hamas tunnel entrances and rocket launch
sites in various agricultural areas and
with so many neighborhoods and homes
destroyed people have had no choice but
to flee more than 80% of gaza's
population have been displaced and
nearly half of them crammed in the far
southern end of the strip that's
according to the UN so small cities of T
have sprung up in Rafa close to the
Egyptian border this is from the 15th of
October if you watch this area because
you'll see just how many tents have
popped up people who have come seeking
Refuge displace people and the Israel
Defense Forces have repeatedly Justified
their actions by noting that Hamas
deliberately embeds itself in civilian
areas and explains the destruction of
buildings in light of targeting Fighters
but experts have said the extent and
pace of the damage when compared with
other conflicts like Ukraine and Syria
is unprecedented
gaza's landscape has changed forever for
those who survived the bombardment the
question is will there be anywhere left
for them to go Merlin Thomas there on
the BBC verifi team well among the sites
destroyed are significant religious
buildings between October the 7th and
the end of last year Israeli bombardment
has damaged or destroyed 72 mosques and
the only two churches in Gaza Heritage
that locals say is now lost forever
our Global religion reporter reaha Kara
explained how they'd measured the damage
to those sites under International
humanitarian law it's considered a war
crime to Target religious sites unless
they are being used for military
purposes now the Israeli Defense Forces
they argue that some of these sites have
been used by Hamas for military purposes
Hamas say that 378 mosques and three
churches have been destroyed but we
can't independently verify those figures
and so this is why it's very important
for us to do our own counting because we
are able to then attribute what we found
online which is at least we found 117
leads on social media that alluded to
the partial destruction or complete
damage of overwhelmingly mosques and
churches and we have been using user
generated content that is Imes and
videos that people have posted onto
social media and comparing them to
befores and afters um of these mosks and
churches as well as satellite imagery
yeah and piecing together all those
different bits of information and being
able to verify you know that those
images are what they say they are is is
a task in itself isn't it um paint a
picture for us if you will of the type
of Destruction that you've seen in these
images well the most Stark for me is um
when we were using satellite imagery I
think
when you're on social media and you are
looking to compare it's very easy to
find before and afters of the
destruction you will see many raised
flattened uh mosques or partially
damaged churches but an aerial view
really provides a stark image of the
before which is very vibrant colorful
neighborhoods compared to the afters
which are very gray no color yeah it is
terrifying isn't it and especially when
with looking at images like this as well
of just utter destruction um and there
is a specific church as well that you've
been looking into because not only of
course are these images of of lives lost
uh damage that and as we said there
locals saying the sort of culture that
will never come back there are
individual stories involved in each of
these tell us about the church that you
looked at specifically so St por ferious
church was one of the churches that was
partially damaged um earlier during the
war on the 19 19th of October uh one of
its outbuildings was um hit by a by an
Israeli air strike that wasn't meant to
hit the church grounds um and 18 people
were reportedly killed five of which
have been told were babies um I spoke to
one Lady Marian Saba who fled there with
her family thinking that going to a
church would keep her and her family
safe um but her brother-in-law died
during the uh attack and she is so
concerned for her child who is only a
year old um that 2 weeks later after the
church was attacked she had her baby
baptized if for fear that if her baby
dies she will she will die without one
wow um it's these individual stories
that once again underline just the
tragedy of all of this um you touched on
what the RF have been saying in response
to you know these attacks that have hit
religious facilities what are they
saying well the IDF they have long
argued that Hamas militants are using
some places of worship to launch attacks
from and that's why they are targeting
them the thing is it's unclear how many
of these sites are ham our strongholds
or how many have been um how many have
been targeted by the IDF so they say
they are acting in accordance with
International humanitarian law um but
they also say that they are trying to
mitig civilian harm as much as possible